2017-10-21
CAPPA cancels cafe, urban farm . . Politician addresses 10-20-30 formula, higher education . . Construction to close parts of west campus . . Veterans Upward Bound procures $1.3M grant . . Panel scrutinizes Senate bill 4 . . Landscape architecture program aims to gain reaccreditation . . Assault, fraudulent credit card charges reported . . UTA ranks No. 2 for Hispanic-serving initiatives . . Chess master to take on 20 competitors simultaneously . . Science associate dean named CAPPA interim dean

~~ The College of Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs Café and the Urban Farming Project have been canceled. The cafe was originally planned to be located on the Richard B. Myrick Courtyard. The proposed cafe’s space is now a multiuse area for seminars, student study groups and events, college associate dean Douglas Klahr said in an email. The cafe was canceled for several reasons. The plans for the dining facility on west campus made the college administrators question the need for the cafe, Klahr said. “The time, disruption and expense of proceeding with construction of the CAPPA Café therefore became questionable,” he said. “Nobody wanted something that might have become functionally obsolete in a year or two.” The college received $89,500 in donations for the cafe, said Sana Syed, associate vice president for university communications, in an email. Since its cancellation, donors have been contacted and the funds have been reallocated with permission. New tables and chairs were purchased for the space with $14,039 of the funds, Syed said. Remaining funds will be used to renovate the large conference room on the building’s second level. The multiuse space is finished, but the college is responsive to student feedback and will adjust if necessary, Syed said. The urban farm was planned to grow food for the cafe, but was canceled due to lack of student interest, Syed said. Construction had already begun on the project prior to its cancellation. The college held a student competition to design the cafe in 2015. Alumnus Hoang Le won the competition and the $1,000 prize while he was a student. Le said in an email the whole design took him a month to complete. He finished it quickly because he loved the concept, Le said. Le declined to comment about the project’s cancellation. Syed said there are no plans to revisit either project. Left: The Shorthorn: Edward MedelesRight: Courtesy: Hoang Le @ReeseOxner news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu     
~~ The Center for African American Studies hosted South Carolina Rep. James Clyburn as the inaugural speaker for its lecture series Thursday night. Jason Shelton, center director and sociology associate professor, said the center was established in 2012 and is one of three in Texas. The center manages the African American Studies minor, including monitoring several classes in the minor and hosting events like this to get the community involved and raise consciousness about racial issues, Shelton said. Clyburn touched on many subjects during his lecture, including his federal funding formula, education and former President Barack Obama’s legacy. Clyburn’s federal funding formula is commonly referred to as the 10-20-30 formula and is aimed at decreasing persistent poverty. The government defines persistent poverty as 20 percent or more of the population falling below the poverty line for 30 years or more, Clyburn said. He said during the Great Depression, Congress came up with the New Deal, which wasn’t good for many of the districts Clyburn represented. “I said, ‘Now, I’m not going to sit here and be a part of a recovery package that will not allow the resources into real communities in need,’” Clyburn said. After the New Deal was passed, Harvard University reached out to Clyburn to write an essay about his formula, and that essay caught the attention of Paul Ryan, speaker of the House, he said. Ryan brought him in front of the budget committee and adopted Clyburn’s formula into his appropriation bill, Clyburn said. The formula can be found in 12 different sections of the appropriations bill. Clyburn also touched on education, saying he is a strong supporter of Federal Pell Grants for students and would like to see student loan interest lowered to the same rate offered to businesses. Clyburn said he’s strongly in favor of supplemental remediation or free extra academic help for those students who may need more assistance than others in attaining a college education. President Vistasp Karbhari praised Clyburn for his continued support of higher education. “From the educational side, he’s a wonderful leader at the national level who will not only bring to us a state of the national discourse, but has a true link to education,” Karbhari said. Clyburn closed the lecture with an anecdote from his childhood. When he and his two brothers were caught having a "physical disagreement" as he put it, their father gave them a wise piece of advice. He took a string between his hands and slowly started rubbing them together. Soon, the friction caused the string to fall apart. Clyburn said his father told them to never let too much friction tear them apart, whether it be from siblings or political rivals. @bekah_morr news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu      
~~ West Nedderman Drive will be closed for construction from UTA Boulevard to the south end of the west campus parking garage during Parent and Family Weekend from 1 a.m. Saturday until work is completed Sunday. The parking garage construction team is installing the precast panel facade on the Nedderman Drive side of the garage with a crane. The area will be closed as a precaution, said Bill Amendola, UT System senior project manager. The construction isn’t expected to impact parking for Parent and Family Weekend, said Greg Hladik, Parking and Transportation Services director. Event parking signs and plenty of spaces will be in the area to help guide visitors, Hladik said. Access to lots 7 and 34 will still be available through detour routes from Cooper Street, Greek Row Drive and Summit Avenue, according to the Parking and Transportation Services website. UTA Boulevard will be closed Nov. 18 from Kerby Street to West Nedderman Drive to remove the last construction crane, Amendola said. The parking garage construction team will finish the final major concrete pour Friday and expects to use the crane until it is taken down, as it removes the shoring used to make sure the concrete sets correctly, Amendola said. @KyleRCotton news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu      
~~ The Veterans Upward Bound program received a $1.3 million grant from the U.S. Department of Education to be distributed during the next five years. The program, which is part of the TRIO Programs, is designed to provide resources for veterans to be successful in their college endeavors, said James Kumm,Veteran Programsexecutive director. Students can receive help with tutoring, mentoring and financial assistance through the program, Kumm said. Grant money pays for those services, the salaries of three full-time employees and other events, Kumm said. The program has existed for five years, but since the grant expired, it was reapplied for and renewed. “What’s really great about this program is that they’re UTA faculty and staff, but they’re paid for through the grant,” he said. “So, UTA actually isn’t spending any additional funding.” Kumm said the program initially started at UTA after Lisa Thompson, TRIO Programs senior director, attended a conference. Thompson saw a grant that was geared toward helping veterans, and creating more veteran services on campus was a goal then, Kumm said. With an influx of veterans coming back to school, Thompson saw a need for the grant. “They’ve spent these first five years building the program,” he said. “And now, they’re hoping to spend the next five years really perfecting it.” The program helps veterans get where they need to be academically, Kumm said, especially since some take a hiatus from school. “They come out of the military with more needs than your traditional student does,” he said. “If you don’t take math for a year, well then now, you’re going to be playing catch up.” As a first-generation college student, Kumm said this program is designed to assist those who may not have anyone else to help them navigate through college. “It’s a great program to really help an underserved population really reach its full potential,” he said. Program coordinator Pete Fitch said the program is critical because it addresses a precollege need. About 135 students are part of the program, he said. While most go on to attend UTA, Fitch said it is not a requirement. “My goal here is to help any veteran that comes through the door,” he said. Fitch, who was on active duty in the Navy for 23 years, said coordinating this program allows him to still help young veterans but in a different capacity. One of those veterans is computer science junior Michael Park. Park, who served five years on active duty in the Army in Afghanistan, graduated from the program and went on to attend UTA. “He’s the epitome of what we do,” Fitch said. Although Park has completed his associate degree at Tarrant County College, his goal is to earn his bachelor’s degree. “That’s my only mission,” he said. Park, who moved to Texas alone partly because of affordability and job security reasons, said the program’s staff is like family to him. Aside from helping with academic matters, he said they assisted him in other ways, too. For example, they walked through all the military benefits he was eligible to receive, some of which he’d have wasted if not for the program, Park said. Every year, the National Association of Veterans Upward Bound has a scholarship ceremony, and Park was nominated to represent UTA this year. The scholarship awards $1,000 to full-time students, which goes toward educational expenses, Fitch said. In the last four years, three recipients were from UTA. Park, who hasn’t won the award yet, said it was an honor to be nominated. “They chose me because I had potential,” he said. Without the program and the help he’s received from those working there, Park said he likely would have given up and not made it to where he is now. “They’re like my backbone,” he said. “They helped me stand up.” @chanel_sassoon news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu     
~~ The Center for Mexican American Studies hosted a panel discussion Wednesday at College Hall to explore the controversies surrounding Senate bill 4, also dubbed the anti-sanctuary city bill. Center director Christian Zlolniski said the event brought up interesting and useful dialogues that were necessary. “There’s a lot of confusion about SB 4. There’s a lot of insecurity out there, particularly in the Latino community,” Zlolniski said. “We needed good information from the right sources.” The panelists included Fatima Menendez, legislative staff attorney at Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, center professor Luis Plascencia and Jaime Ayala, Arlington Police Department assistant police chief. After Gov. Greg Abbott signed the bill May 7, SB 4 was to take effect Sept. 1. The federal court temporarily blocked some provisions of the law from going into effect Aug. 30 following a lawsuit filed by several civil rights organizations like the one Menendez is part of. Menendez said more than 600 people testified, 1,100 registered in opposition of SB 4 and 13 people registered in favor of SB 4 with none testifying. “SB 4 was a legislative solution to something that was not even a problem,” Menendez said. “SB 4 has been searching for an issue and a problem since it was created and since it was enacted.” Some local governments obeyed the federal immigration laws before SB 4. Such agencies detained individuals already in custody for an additional 48 hours of investigation based on U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement detainer, an immigration warrant written by the federal government that cited individuals could be removed. Other government entities used sanctuary city policies as a subversion to the federal policies. SB 4 mandates local governments to comply with the federal government’s immigration laws and prohibits the sanctuary city policies. “There were a lot of references that were visible, that showed this was, sort of, intentional discrimination and who it were targeted against,” Menendez said. The state of Texas appealed the court’s decision and will defend its case in the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans during the week of Nov. 6. “It’s definitely constitutional violation arguments that we’re going to be making. First Amendment, Fourth Amendment, 14th Amendment are what we’re focusing on,” Menendez said. Plascencia highlighted Arizona’s Senate bill 1070 and its regulation of Mexican immigration and compared it with Texas’ SB 4. Plascencia said the current regulations took shape after societal and legal transformations that occurred over an extended period of time. Many prior laws that led to Arizona’s SB 1070 included measures such as voter suppression, limiting services to English speakers, denial of in-state tuitions and bail to “undocumented” individuals, prohibition of ethnic studies programs and limiting driver licenses, among others, he said. “You do not need a law to actually make a stop,” Plascencia said. “You observe a violation and you have a discretion to take an action. You stop the person. You’ll never say, or you’re not suppose to say, that you stopped them because they look Mexican.” Such regulations do not aim to deport immigrants from the U.S. but create a sense of fear from potential apprehension among the immigrant labor workforce, Plascencia said. “They need this workforce,” Plascencia said. “The aim is to create a better workforce, more pliable and disciplined workforce.” In recent months, Arlington citizens have urged council members to join the lawsuit against the state. Ayala said the Arlington Police Department serves and the community supports, but it will have to follow the law. “What we do want to do is make sure that we are in compliance with whatever the lawmakers decide that should be the law,” Ayala said. “One thing we can’t do in law enforcement, from my perspective, is choose which laws we’re gonna enforce and which we’re not.” If SB 4 takes effect, although it has voiced its opposition, the department will act in a legal and transparent manner, Ayala said. The bill seeks to punish local government departments that don’t cooperate with federal immigration requests or detainer requests. “It’s a federal issue,” Ayala said. “I can’t drive that home enough that the federal government needs to do what they need to do to develop what immigration laws need to be in place, but not to extend the authority or responsibility of local law enforcements.” English senior Mark Scheldberg said he attended the panel discussion to learn about SB 4 and what it might hold in the future. “Certain provisions were not in place or blocked. I was really confused about, like, what provisions are in place, so that kind of cleared it out,” Scheldberg said. “Mostly that just understanding what it actually entails.” @neetishbasnet news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu     
~~ Ravija Munshi, left, and Adrianna Tobias, landscape architecture graduate students, work on their concept diagram during their studio class Oct. 12 in the Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs building. Tobias and Munshi said they are working on concepts to connect Lehigh Avenue in north Philadelphia to neighboring communities. The College of Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs landscape architecture program is preparing for reaccreditation. Accreditation is the process of making sure the program meets specific standards and requirements. Accreditation allows program graduates to sit for the Landscape Architecture Registration Exam. The program will undergo review in fall 2018. The Landscape Architectural Accreditation Board will evaluate the school, students, student work, faculty, coursework, syllabi and more from the past six years. Diane Jones Allen was hired this summer as the landscape architecture program director. She has spent the past couple of months learning about the program and getting ready for reaccreditation. “This is an excellent program with excellent faculty,” she said. Camille Wildburger, landscape architecture graduate student, plots a point on her concept map Oct. 12 in the Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs building. Wildburger is one of 27 students in the landscape architecture graduate student program at UTA. The program only has 27 students but has the capacity for more. Allen said this is because not many students are aware of the profession or the program. “The school is called CAPPA – the College of Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs,” she said. “We’re not even in the name.” One of her goals is to promote the program both internationally and to UTA students. The graduate program is a first professional degree program, meaning anyone with a bachelor’s degree can apply, regardless of major. Currently, only a master’s degree is offered by the program, but the department will explore the possibility of adding undergraduate and doctoral programs in the future, Allen said. Camille Wildburger, landscape architecture graduate student, points at a map of Lehigh Avenue in north Philadelphia on her laptop Oct. 12 in the Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs building. Wildburger said she and her partner, Mohamed Amer, landscape architecture graduate student, are proposing a new east-to-west parkway in the area. David Hopman, landscape architecture associate professor, did not discover the field until he was about 40 and thinking about a new career. He was previously a musician for 20 years and briefly taught music at UTA. “If you’re interested in the outdoors and trying to make the world a better place, I think there’s a home for you in landscape architecture,” he said. Hopman said many of his students come from various backgrounds, but they all have one thing in common: commitment. “You have to be dedicated,” Allen said. “You have to be passionate about the earth, people, plants.” Many people think the profession is gardening or only about plants, but it’s more than that, said Crystal Kazakos, landscape architecture graduate student. It’s about designing the spaces around the buildings. Landscape architects have to design using ecology and living materials with human needs in mind, she said. “We do everything outside the building and below it,” Hopman said. Allen said landscape architecture is more relevant now than ever, because of changing temperatures and conditions. “If you care about the planet and how we live on it, then landscape architecture is the profession for you,” Allen said. Ravija Munshi, left, and Adrianna Tobias, landscape architecture graduate students, draw lines on wax paper over a map of Lehigh Avenue in north Philadelphia Oct. 12 in the Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs building. Tobias said their project is due Oct. 27.  @reeseoxner news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu     
~~ Friday Theft UTA Police received a report of theft at its substation near Park Central garage. The stolen property’s value is under $100, according to the UTA Police press book. An investigation into the theft is ongoing, according to the press book. Theft of property under $100 is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $500, according to the Texas Penal Code. Credit card abuse A male staff member reported to UTA Police two fraudulent attempted charges on his university procurement card. Citibank notified the staff member of the charges, UTA Police Capt. Mike McCord said. The amount fraudulently attempted to be charged to the card is unknown, McCord said. Credit card abuse is a state jail felony, punishable by 180 days to two years in a state jail and a possible fine up to $10,000, according to the Texas Penal Code. Saturday Credit card abuse A male student reported eight fraudulent charges on his personal credit card to UTA Police. The eight charges totaled $618, McCord said. Credit card abuse is a state jail felony, punishable by 180 days to two years in a state jail and a possible fine up to $10,000, according to the Texas Penal Code. Sunday Assault­ – threaten another with imminent bodily harm A man reported he was threatened by an unknown man after a basketball game in the Maverick Activities Center. The unknown man left prior to the officer’s arrival, McCord said. An investigation into the incident is ongoing, according to the UTA Police press book. Assault is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $500, according to the Texas Penal Code. @KyleRCotton news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu     
~~ UTA continues to gain recognition for serving its Hispanic student population. Best Value Schools, a national publication focused on higher education, ranked UTA No. 2 on its list of best Hispanic-serving colleges and universities in Texas for 2018. The publication generated the outcome based on high return on investment, affordability, total Hispanic student population, Hispanic-focused student organizations, centers and institutes, resources available and scholarship and award opportunities. The ranking compared the 49 Texas Hispanic-serving institutions, a designation received for excellence in serving Hispanic students. In 2014, UTA became a Hispanic-serving institution, making the university eligible for several federal grants. Christian Zlolniski, Center for Mexican American Studies director, was part of the UTA Hispanic-Serving Institution Task Force that initially formed to achieve the designation. He said recognitions such as the one given by Best Value Schools acts as a reminder that the university succeeded in the completion of that vision. “It’s the results of all those efforts and programs that are now being paid off,” Zlolniski said. “Having said that, that doesn’t mean that we can’t and we shouldn’t do more. There’s a long way still to go.” According to fall 2017 enrollment data, Hispanic students make up about 26 percent of the total student body and compared to last fall, the Hispanic population increased by 1,013 students. The center, along with many other campus facilities, provides Hispanic students with the tools to succeed and thrive, Zlolniski said. “We have to do more of all the things that do work that lead [Hispanic students] to succeed and reach out to more students and get them to that level of success,” Zlolniski said. “The future looks good, provided that we get the resources needed to support the students.” Nursing associate professor Donelle Barnes currently oversees the endowment and scholarship funds at the Center for Hispanic Studies in Nursing and Health, one of the UTA programs aimed at serving the Hispanic population at UTA and at large. “Historically, or over time, we’ve developed a positive reputation that we are somewhere that is friendly to minority students, including minority Hispanic students,” Barnes said. According to an American Enterprise Institute study, Hispanic students typically graduate at lower rates than their white counterparts, but the graduation rate is higher at Hispanic-serving institutions like UTA. “We want to give them a little more support and help and encouragement, whatever they might need,” Barnes said. “Because, of course, we want them to be just as successful as a white student in finishing the program.” UTA has student success mechanisms in place, which Barnes said help students overcome any potential academic or personal issues. The Best Value Schools recognition and being able to teach at such a diverse campus makes her proud and happy, Barnes said. “I think it’s good to have diversity – bottom line – Hispanics, African-Americans, Asians, etc.,” she said. “I think it brings a diversity of ideas. It brings a diversity of viewpoints.” Spanish senior Claudia Martinez Ponce is the president of La Sociedad Hispanica and said getting education from a good institution is getting more importance, considering the complex societal and political situation Hispanics are having to face. La Sociedad Hispanica is a student organization that promotes Hispanic heritage and culture on campus by conducting various cultural and educational events. Ponce said most Hispanics are first-generation students without guidance from their parents, but UTA has provided them with resources that eased the process. “For Hispanics, I feel like we’re very optimistic,” Ponce said. “We like to, of course, obtain a better life than our parents did.” She said she hopes the campus would continue the support and make students more aware about the resources available. “This could help all the students, not only Latinos or Hispanics, if you know exactly what’s out there for you,” Ponce said. @NeetishBasnet news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu      
~~ Civil engineering sophomore Dion Su will challenge about 20 armies of knights, pawns and more at noon Wednesday on the Central Library mall. The chess national master and president of Maverick Chess Club hopes to play 20 games simultaneously against club members and interested students. Su said his goal is to create game and club awareness. “It’s going to be a different experience, for sure,” Su said. “I’ve never tried playing against this many people at once before.” In spring 2017, Su said he played seven simultaneous games but playing 20 games should provide more of a challenge. He said the club is looking for about five more players to make a full 20 games at the event. When he was 7 years old, Su found a chess set at a friend’s house. Since then, he has played enough to attain a winning rating of over 2,200 for 300 games, placing him at a national master level. The rating is a tournament result-based system created by Arpad Elo, a U.S. Chess Federation founder. “My pops used to beat me when I was a kid and I, kind of, was competitive, so I just kept practicing until eventually I could take him out,” Su said. “It sparked my interest.” Su joined the club about a year ago and wants to plan monthly events as president, he said. Computer science junior Evan Cornish will play against Su. “I am not going to win,” he said. “I’m just going to do my best and lose honorably. There’s not any luck in chess. Dion is years ahead of me just in chess understanding.” Cornish joined the club with Su. He said the organization has picked up speed since he first joined. “Now we have a serious chess club that meets consistently,” he said. “I was told two years ago that meetings would just be canceled every week constantly. I don’t think we’ve missed a meeting for over a year.” Dual credit student Devina Devagharan is a women’s master with the World Chess Federation and coaches club members in tactics and theory. She said she attained master status by winning a tournament, but it took time and practice to win. “I joined a club, my dad fought me,” she said. “I lost a lot, but it’s about getting back up and studying more and practicing more. I practice online. I spend hours a day.” Success in chess requires knowing theory and tactics or planning multiple moves ahead, Cornish said. “You start using tactics when you’ve reached the end of what you have memorized, which actually comes up quite quickly,” he said. “No one can memorize everything.” @Audrey_Henvey news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu      
~~ James Grover has been announced as the College of Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs interim dean. The College of Science associate dean and professor's appointment will be effective Nov. 1, according to an email sent by Teik Lim, provost and vice president for academic affairs, to university employees Monday. He is expected to maintain the position until a permanent dean is hired. “Dr. Grover has been with UTA for more than two decades and is highly respected by peers and students,” Lim said. Grover started at UTA as an assistant professor in 1993 and has held various positions since that time. Ronald Elsenbaumer, senior adviser to the president of entrepreneurship and economic development and the current interim dean, accepted a position as founding chancellor of Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne and will leave UTA at the end of October. Grover said his past experience as the Science interim dean makes him qualified for the position. "I'm familiar with what's necessary to keep a college running," he said. "But also, I know how important it is for someone to be ready when a new dean comes in to pass things off." Because of his background outside Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs, Grover said he will need to rely on the college’s administration for support. Grover said he accepted the position about a week ago. "It looked like an interesting opportunity to do something very helpful for the university," he said. While filling the interim dean position, Grover will remain a professor but not as the Science associate dean. "I love what I currently do," he said. "So, that's the downside to this." He is planning to resume his position after a permanent dean is hired, which he expects to take a few months. "These searches can be complicated. Sometimes, they take longer than people expect," Grover said. It's a reasonable expectation the new dean will be selected by spring or summer, he said. Grover said he is not planning on making any major changes to the college but instead is going to maintain the college and prepare for the new dean. "I really believe what [the College of Architecture, Planning and Public Affairs] represents is going to be very important for this university," he said. "So, my goal is to articulate that." @reeseoxner news-editor.shorthorn@uta.edu    